:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       B62DB97F-BBB0-42E2-98A5-13E3AC5A315B
:END:
#+title: QT4 CG Meeting 023 Agenda 2023-02-21
#+author: Norm Tovey-Walsh
#+filetags: :qt4cg:
#+options: html-style:nil h:6 toc:nil
#+html_head: <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="/meeting/css/htmlize.css"/>
#+html_head: <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../css/style.css"/>
#+html_head: <link rel="shortcut icon" href="/img/QT4-64.png" />
#+html_head: <link rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="64x64" href="/img/QT4-64.png" type="image/png" />
#+html_head: <link rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="76x76" href="/img/QT4-76.png" type="image/png" />
#+html_head: <link rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="120x120" href="/img/QT4-120.png" type="image/png" />
#+html_head: <link rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="152x152" href="/img/QT4-152.png" type="image/png" />
#+options: author:nil email:nil creator:nil timestamp:nil
#+startup: showall

* Agenda
:PROPERTIES:
:unnumbered: t
:CUSTOM_ID: agenda
:END:

This meeting will be hosted on Zoom at 16:00GMT (17:00CET, 11:00EST).

See the [[https://qt4cg.org/meeting/logistics.html][meeting logistics]] page for details.

This meeting will focus on XSLT issues.

* Administrivia
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: administrivia
:END:

** Roll call
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: roll-call
:END:

** Approve the agenda
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: accept-agenda
:END:

** Approve minutes of previous meeting
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: approve-minutes
:END:

Minutes of [[../../minutes/2023/02-14.html][the previous meeting]].

** Next meeting
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: next-meeting
:END:

This meeting is planned for
21 February,
the following meeting is scheduled for
28 February.

Any regrets for the following meeting?

** Review of open action items [2/6]
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: open-actions
:END:

(Items marked [X] are believed to have been closed via email before
this agenda was posted.)

+ [ ] QT4CG-002-10: BTW to coordinate some ideas about improving diversity in the group
+ [ ] QT4CG-016-08: RD to clarify how namespace comparisons are performed.
+ [X] QT4CG-021-01: NW to raise a PR addressing the points in issue #307
  + https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-347
+ [X] QT4CG-021-02: NW to check for deprecated URI features and add options for them in =fn:build-uri= and =fn:parse-uri=
  + https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-347
+ [ ] QT4CG-021-03: RD to change =must= to =will= in DOM notes about lowercase
+ [ ] QT4CG-021-04: RD to revise and move the note about unrecognized entities

* Technical Agenda
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: technical-agenda
:END:

** Open PRs related to XSLT
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: h-CDF49238-C878-4CCF-9564-28BBF18FC841
:END:

T.B.A.

** Review of appendixes J.1.1 and J.1.2.
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: h-5ACE0622-A613-4026-9074-C7492E84CC15
:END:

See [[https://qt4cg.org/specifications/xslt-40/Overview.html#changes-since-3.0][J Changes since XSLT 3.0]].

Weâ€™ll review the items in J.1.1. and J.1.2. with an eye towards
categorizing them as:

a. already agreed by the CG
b. needs discussion and agreement
c. OK to rubber-stamp without detailed review
d. probably best withdrawn for reconsideration.

* Any other business
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: any-other-business
:END:
