<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html;charset=utf-8" />
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1" />
<title>QT4 CG Meeting 006 Minutes 2022-10-11</title>
<meta name="generator" content="Org Mode" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="/meeting/css/htmlize.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body>
<div id="content" class="content">
<h1 class="title">QT4 CG Meeting 006 Minutes 2022-10-11</h1>
<div id="table-of-contents" role="doc-toc">
<h2>Table of Contents</h2>
<div id="text-table-of-contents" role="doc-toc">
<ul>
<li><a href="#minutes">Draft Minutes</a></li>
<li><a href="#new-actions">Summary of new and continuing actions <code>[0/6]</code></a></li>
<li><a href="#administrivia">1. Administrivia</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#roll-call">1.1. Roll call <code>[11/13]</code></a></li>
<li><a href="#agenda">1.2. Accept the agenda</a></li>
<li><a href="#next-meeting">1.3. Next meeting</a></li>
<li><a href="#approve-minutes">1.4. Approve minutes of the previous meeting</a></li>
<li><a href="#review-of-actions">1.5. Review of open action items <code>[5/7]</code></a></li>
<li><a href="#schedule-xslt">1.6. Scheduling XSLT work</a></li>
<li><a href="#timezones">1.7. Timezones</a></li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><a href="#technical-agenda">2. Technical Agenda</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#pr-variadic-functions">2.1. Review pull request #197 (was 166; variadic functions)</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-fn-op">2.2. Review pull request #198 (was 173; fn:op)</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-items-before">2.3. Review pull request #201 (was 188; editorial)</a></li>
<li><a href="#fn-while">2.4. fn:while (previously fn:until)</a></li>
<li><a href="#hof-sequence-functions">2.5. HOF sequence functions and positional arguments</a></li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><a href="#h-BF9058D4-4FAD-428B-89FD-89907EF7F0E5">3. Any other business</a></li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-minutes" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="minutes">Draft Minutes</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-minutes">
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-new-actions" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="new-actions">Summary of new and continuing actions <code>[0/6]</code></h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-new-actions">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-002-10: BTW to coordinate some ideas about improving diversity in the group</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-005-03: RD to review the variadic functions proposal in #197 (formerly #166)</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-006-01: JK to review the variadic functions proposal in #197</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-006-02: NW to make the changed files heading to be more obviously a link.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-006-03: MK to make a separate proposal for supporting the Unicode operator symbols</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-006-04: NW to point to the dashboard links from the agendas.</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-administrivia" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="administrivia"><span class="section-number-2">1.</span> Administrivia</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-administrivia">
</div>

<div id="outline-container-roll-call" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="roll-call"><span class="section-number-3">1.1.</span> Roll call <code>[11/13]</code></h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-roll-call">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Anthony Bufort (AB)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Reece Dunn (RD)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Christian Grün (CG)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Joel Kalvesmaki (JK)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Michael Kay (MK)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> John Lumley (JL)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Dimitre Novatchev (DN)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Ed Porter (EP)</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> Liam Quin (LQ)</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> Adam Retter</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> C. M. Sperberg-McQueen (MSM)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Bethan Tovey-Walsh (BTW)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Norm Tovey-Walsh (NW). <i>Chair</i>. <i>Scribe</i>.</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-agenda" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="agenda"><span class="section-number-3">1.2.</span> Accept the agenda</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-agenda">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>NW: I’d like to discuss when the meeting time for this call is anchored.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Accept <a href="../../agenda/2022/10-11.html">the agenda</a> with NW ammendment.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-next-meeting" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="next-meeting"><span class="section-number-3">1.3.</span> Next meeting</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-next-meeting">
<p>
The next meeting <a href="../../agenda/2022/10-18.html">is scheduled for Tuesday, 18 October</a>. Any regrets?
</p>

<p>
Regrets: EP.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-approve-minutes" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="approve-minutes"><span class="section-number-3">1.4.</span> Approve minutes of the previous meeting</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-approve-minutes">
<p>
Proposal: Accept <a href="../../minutes/2022/10-04.html">the minutes of the previous meeting</a>.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-review-of-actions" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="review-of-actions"><span class="section-number-3">1.5.</span> Review of open action items <code>[5/7]</code></h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-review-of-actions">
<p>
(Items marked [X] are believed to have been closed via email before
this agenda was posted.)
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> QT4CG-002-01: NW to incorporate email feedback and produce new
versions of the process documents. 
<ul class="org-ul">
<li><a href="https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-xslt-40/2022Oct/0027.html">https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-xslt-40/2022Oct/0027.html</a></li>
</ul></li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> QT4CG-003-03: NW to tweak the CSS for function signatures to avoid line breaks on <code>-</code> characters.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li><a href="https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-xslt-40/2022Oct/0012.html">https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-xslt-40/2022Oct/0012.html</a></li>
</ul></li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-002-10: BTW to coordinate some ideas about improving diversity in the group
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>Continued</li>
</ul></li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> QT4CG-005-01: NW to update the W3C CG page to reflect the current chairs
<ul class="org-ul">
<li><a href="https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-xslt-40/2022Oct/0001.html">https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-xslt-40/2022Oct/0001.html</a></li>
</ul></li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> QT4CG-005-02: NW to investigate how the function dropdown works and if it’s buggy
<ul class="org-ul">
<li><a href="https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-xslt-40/2022Oct/0002.html">https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-xslt-40/2022Oct/0002.html</a></li>
</ul></li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-005-03: RD to review the variadic functions proposal in #166
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>Continued</li>
</ul></li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> QT4CG-005-04: MK to draft a concrete proposal for the range-related functions
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>See <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/pull/177">pull request #177</a>, also <a href="#pr-items-before">below</a>.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-schedule-xslt" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="schedule-xslt"><span class="section-number-3">1.6.</span> Scheduling XSLT work</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-schedule-xslt">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK <a href="https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-xslt-40/2022Oct/0017.html">writes</a>:</li>
</ul>

<blockquote>
<p>
I'd also like to talk about how we tackle XSLT issues - would anyone
prefer if some meetings were dedicated to that spec?
</p>
</blockquote>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: Should we do 1 meeting a month on XSLT? Or shall we mix it in?</li>
<li>JL: I’d like to see some work on the XSLT side.</li>
<li>NW: I’ll mix them in if we don’t have special meetings</li>
<li>MSM: Will there be analagous XQuery issues? If so, we can designate some meetings for XQuery.</li>
<li>DN: XSLT and XQuery depend on XPath, so we should be aware of that
and discuss XSLT and XQuery with XPath.</li>
<li>RD: I think it’s useful to discuss XSLT and XQuery together.</li>
<li>CG: I think we have lots of XSLT issues that need to be discussed,
regarding XQuery most things are XPath specific but we may have
XQuery things in the future.</li>
<li>lRD: I think some of the annotations work may be XQuery-specific.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: We’ll mix the XSLT and XQuery issues into the regular meetings.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-timezones" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="timezones"><span class="section-number-3">1.7.</span> Timezones</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-timezones">
<p>
After discussion, the proposal is that we will stay on European time.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>

<p>
DN observes that the meeting of 1 November is the only one when the
relative meeting time will be out-of-sync due to varying changes to
standard time.
</p>

<p>
The proposal to skip meeting on 1 November did not get traction.
</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-technical-agenda" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="technical-agenda"><span class="section-number-2">2.</span> Technical Agenda</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-technical-agenda">
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-variadic-functions" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="pr-variadic-functions"><span class="section-number-3">2.1.</span> Review pull request #197 (was 166; variadic functions)</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-pr-variadic-functions">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>See <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/pull/197">pull request #197</a> (you’ll find links to formatted versions of the specs at <a href="https://qt4cg.org/">https://qt4cg.org/</a>).</li>
<li>See also the nexus of issues <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/162">#162</a>, <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/161">#161</a>, <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/160">#160</a>, <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/159">#159</a>, <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/158">#158</a>, <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/157">#157</a>, and <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/155">#155</a>.</li>
</ul>

<p>
MK asks if the CG would like him to walk through the proposal. General agreement, “yes”. 
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK scrolls through the XQuery spec:
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>…reversion of default function namespace to what it was before</li>
<li>…changed statically known functions to “declared functions”; they aren’t just functions
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>There’s a model for functions and the fact that they now have optional parameters</li>
</ul></li>
<li>…Lots of irrelevant changes because production numbers changed</li>
<li>…Statically declared functions has been changed. Rules for matching by name and arity.</li>
<li>…Syntax for static function calls; we use <code>:=</code> for the separator.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>There’s a separate issue for whether a <code>$</code> is required before
arguments; draft doesn’t include it.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>…Changes to function calls; a declared function can now have an arity range
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>Arity ranges must be non-overlapping</li>
</ul></li>
<li>…Positional arguments are bound first, then positional ones, then defaults</li>
<li>…Evaluate all the expressions, including the defaults, in the
dynamic context of the function call.</li>
<li>…Then you do type conversion using coercion rules</li>
<li>…Dynamic function calls don’t change all that much, only positional
binding is allowed in the current proposal.</li>
<li>…Named function references are again based on binding the arity</li>
<li>…Function declarations now declare a “family” of functions.</li>
<li>…More detail is spelled out here, it probably should have been in the previous spec too.</li>
</ul></li>

<li>MK: Essentially same the rules exist in the XSLT spec, but I won’t go through it.</li>

<li>JL: I seem to have missed where the arbitrary number of arguments (i.e. <code>concat()</code>) is handled.</li>
<li>MK: That’s not in this proposal, it’ll come later. Concat is still
handled here as a completely special case.</li>
<li>DN: I think it says that in a function call the expressions for the
arguments are evaluated and then the function is called.</li>
<li>MK: Yes.</li>
<li>DN: Is there any reason why the arguments should be evaluated
eagerly? I’m going to submit a proposal for lazy evaluation.</li>
<li>MK: Section 2 of the spec gives you license to evaluate them lazily or not at all.</li>
<li>DN: Exactly, because some functions are useless without lazy
evaluation. I think we as a group should look into this.</li>
<li>MK: By all means submit a proposal, but be aware that the problems
historically in the errors and optimization sections have been
profound. The error handling is weakly and informally described. How
much optimization you’re allowed to do is a troublesome area.</li>
<li>RD: You also have to be careful with things like the context item.
You must make sure that you’re lazily evaluating it in the dynamic
context in which it was called, not the context in which the
parameter name is referenced.</li>
<li>MK: Getting all that right is quite challenging in terms of getting
language that’s formal enough to get interoperability.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>…We always balked at trying to do a formal model for error handling.  It’s a weakness in the language.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>MSM: If I understand correctly, you’ve chosen the approach that in
the data model we have functions and the functions in the data model
have invariably a fixed arity. A declaration that declares optional
arguments declares a family of functions. It seems to me, as you
were going through, that if I bind a variable to I’ll say “a
function” but I’m using the term informally, what I get may depend
on how I do it. If I want to bind my variable <code>$v</code> to <code>f</code> by anme,
then I’ll say <code>$v := f#2</code>. If I say
<code>$v := someExpression(with,params)</code> then I seem to have <code>$v</code> bound
to the set of members in that family?</li>
<li>MK: Inline functions haven’t changed.</li>
<li>RD: We have a separate issue to investigate whether or not we can do that.</li>
<li>MSM: So here the shoe pinches because the function item doesn’t have
quite the same form as the declaration.</li>
<li>RD: Named function item reference is always bound to a specific arity.</li>
<li>MK: And a partial application gives you a fixed arity function where
some arguments are bound and some aren’t.</li>
<li>RD: That’s using the <code>?</code> notation?</li>
<li>MK: Right.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Some discussion of whether we can assign reviewers for pull requests
as DN suggests. We encourage volunteers, but it’s not clear to the
chair that we can usefully assign readers.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>JK: What’s the method for reviewers to give feedback?</li>
<li>NW: I think that comments on the pull request are a good idea. Start
an email thread if you think that will be more productive.</li>
</ul>

<p>
RD describes the GitHub approval process.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>JK: I’ll review #197.</li>
</ul>

<p>
ACTION QT4CG-006-01: JK to review the variadic functions proposal in #197
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: It would be nice to somehow know what specs have changed.</li>
<li>NW: The “changed files” link on the dashboard is meant to be an aid,
I’d like to do better.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Ed suggests making the changed files link underlined and make the
cursor.
</p>

<p>
ACTION QT4CG-006-02: NW to make the changed files heading to be more obviously a link.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>NW: We’ll come back to this again next week.</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-fn-op" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="pr-fn-op"><span class="section-number-3">2.2.</span> Review pull request #198 (was 173; fn:op)</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-pr-fn-op">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>See <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/pull/198">pull request #198</a></li>

<li>CG: I had a quick look and I think it’s fine.</li>

<li>MK walks us through it:
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… It adds an <code>fn:op()</code> function…</li>
<li>… Defined in terms of a lexical expansion</li>
</ul></li>

<li>JL: Is this intended also to handle the Unicode symbols for the various operators?</li>
<li>MK: I’d forgotten those! I guess if we go ahead, they should be added.</li>
<li>RD: They should also be added into the grammar as well.</li>
</ul>

<p>
ACTION QT4CG-006-03: MK to make a separate proposal for supporting the Unicode operator symbols
</p>

<p>
Proposal: Accept PR #198
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>

<p>
Some discussion of whether or not the “history” section will continue
to exist when we publish the specification. Opinion is divided.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>JK: It would help readers if there was a link to where the binary operators are defined.</li>
<li>NW: That’s a good idea.</li>
<li>MSM: I’d like a link to the entry for the pull request on the dashboard.</li>
</ul>

<p>
ACTION QT4CG-006-04: NW to point to the dashboard links from the agendas.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-items-before" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="pr-items-before"><span class="section-number-3">2.3.</span> Review pull request #201 (was 188; editorial)</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-pr-items-before">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>See <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/pull/201">pull request #201</a></li>
</ul>

<p>
RD observes that this pull request has a couple of approvals and seems straightforward…
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>NW: Good point.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Accept this PR #201
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>

<p>
(Chair skips several items as time is short, moves to the items CG requested.)
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-fn-while" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="fn-while"><span class="section-number-3">2.4.</span> fn:while (previously fn:until)</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-fn-while">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>See <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/80">#80</a></li>
</ul>

<p>
CG suggested that this might complement the discussion of splitting
sequences, see <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/149">#149</a>.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>CG: Thanks for all the discussion.</li>
<li>CG shares his proposal in issue #80
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… Discussion of recursive algorithms and why “while” might be easier to understand</li>
<li>… I think there are no equivalent solutions right now</li>
</ul></li>
<li>MK: Other than recursion.</li>
<li>MK: My feeling is a bit like my reaction to “fold”, I’ve never seen
myself needing this. But over the years, you come to grow and love
fold, as you discover it’s power.</li>
<li>RD: There are cases, especially adapting algorithms from imperative
languages where you need to keep track of a loop variable that is
difficult to do in XQuery. One example is parsing CSV where you need
to keep track of where your splitting.</li>
<li>NW: I’m in favor of things that make recursion less necessary.</li>
<li>JL: I concur with MK’s point.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Consensus is that CG should write up a proposal.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-hof-sequence-functions" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="hof-sequence-functions"><span class="section-number-3">2.5.</span> HOF sequence functions and positional arguments</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-hof-sequence-functions">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>See <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/181">#181</a></li>
</ul>

<p>
CG says “I haven’t drafted a full proposal yet, as I’d first like to
hear what everyone thinks about it.”
</p>

<p>
After brief discussion, general agreement that CG should go ahead and draft a proposal.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>DN: I was the under the impression that indpendently from this
function, MK submitted a langauge propsal about <code>while</code>, so maybe
we need to know how they’re related.</li>
<li>MK: I think when we have two proposals with overlapping
functionality, we can take a look and decide which to accept.</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-h-BF9058D4-4FAD-428B-89FD-89907EF7F0E5" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="h-BF9058D4-4FAD-428B-89FD-89907EF7F0E5"><span class="section-number-2">3.</span> Any other business</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-h-BF9058D4-4FAD-428B-89FD-89907EF7F0E5">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>AB: What’s the process for starting a proposal and getting feedback and discussion?</li>
</ul>

<p>
After brief discussion, consensus is that the best way is to create an
issue describing the problem that you’d like to solve. Can also send email.
</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
