<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html;charset=utf-8" />
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1" />
<title>QT4 CG Meeting 011 Minutes 2022-11-15</title>
<meta name="generator" content="Org Mode" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="/meeting/css/htmlize.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body>
<div id="content" class="content">
<h1 class="title">QT4 CG Meeting 011 Minutes 2022-11-15</h1>
<div id="table-of-contents" role="doc-toc">
<h2>Table of Contents</h2>
<div id="text-table-of-contents" role="doc-toc">
<ul>
<li><a href="#minutes">Minutes</a></li>
<li><a href="#new-actions">Summary of new and continuing actions <code>[1/8]</code></a></li>
<li><a href="#administrivia">1. Administrivia</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#roll-call">1.1. Roll call <code>[10/13]</code></a></li>
<li><a href="#agenda">1.2. Accept the agenda</a></li>
<li><a href="#next-meeting">1.3. Next meeting</a></li>
<li><a href="#approve-minutes">1.4. Approve minutes of the previous meeting</a></li>
<li><a href="#open-actions">1.5. Review of open action items <code>[7/8]</code></a></li>
<li><a href="#merging-prs">1.6. Merging PRs that are accepted in principle</a></li>
<li><a href="#meeting-logistics">1.7. Meeting logistics</a></li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><a href="#technical-agenda">2. Technical Agenda</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#pr-variadic-functions">2.1. Review pull request #197 (was 166; variadic functions)</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-fn-while">2.2. Review pull request #210: Issue 80: fn:while</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-subtyping">2.3. Review pull request #202 (was 196; subtyping)</a></li>
<li><a href="#h-743C4A9D-BAEF-4C75-A412-BDFAA9C89856">2.4. Review pull request #207: new expanded-QName function</a></li>
<li><a href="#h-11CAAAFD-8175-4D10-83FA-BEC6AA3312A6">2.5. Review pull request #215: parse-uri/build-uri</a></li>
<li><a href="#h-04B58DC1-A005-4AD5-83F0-B3BCE110FB76">2.6. Review pull request #222: sequence comparisons</a></li>
<li><a href="#h-37009862-494E-4CCE-9FA7-DE5B2E9F8474">2.7. Review pull request #228: make F&amp;O spec valid XML</a></li>
<li><a href="#h-A132F93F-0414-4495-A868-A7F32A6D642A">2.8. Review pull request #230: guarded expressions, issue #71</a></li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><a href="#any-other-business">3. Any other business</a></li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-minutes" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="minutes">Minutes</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-minutes">
<p>
Approved <a href="./11-22.html">at meeting 012</a> on 22 November 2022.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-new-actions" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="new-actions">Summary of new and continuing actions <code>[1/8]</code></h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-new-actions">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-002-10: BTW to coordinate some ideas about improving diversity in the group</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-011-01: MK to fix the reference to “function” in XPath 4.4.1.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-011-02: CG to work with DN to propose an “until” variant.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-011-03: MK to change the references to URI qualified name in both QName-related functions.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-011-04: NW to define the parse-uri/build-uri record types in a separate section</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-011-05: NW to update the history for parse-uri/build-uri to indicate that details are still being resolved</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-011-06: NW to make sure ednotes are rendered.</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> QT4CG-011-07: NW to make sure the meeting passcode is on the logistics page
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>This is already the case</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-administrivia" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="administrivia"><span class="section-number-2">1.</span> Administrivia</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-administrivia">
</div>

<div id="outline-container-roll-call" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="roll-call"><span class="section-number-3">1.1.</span> Roll call <code>[10/13]</code></h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-roll-call">
<p>
Regrets BTW
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Anthony (Tony) Bufort (AB)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Reece Dunn (RD)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Christian Grün (CG)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Joel Kalvesmaki (JK) [0:15-]</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Michael Kay (MK)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> John Lumley (JL)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Dimitre Novatchev (DN)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Ed Porter (EP)</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> Liam Quin (LQ)</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> Adam Retter</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> C. M. Sperberg-McQueen (MSM)</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> Bethan Tovey-Walsh (BTW)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Norm Tovey-Walsh (NW). <i>Scribe</i>. <i>Chair</i>.</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-agenda" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="agenda"><span class="section-number-3">1.2.</span> Accept the agenda</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-agenda">
<p>
Proposal: Accept <a href="../../agenda/2022/11-15.html">the agenda</a>.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-next-meeting" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="next-meeting"><span class="section-number-3">1.3.</span> Next meeting</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-next-meeting">
<p>
The next meeting <a href="../../agenda/2022/11-22.html">is scheduled for Tuesday, 22 November</a>.
</p>

<p>
Regrets: JL for 22 and 29 November.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-approve-minutes" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="approve-minutes"><span class="section-number-3">1.4.</span> Approve minutes of the previous meeting</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-approve-minutes">
<p>
Proposal: Accept <a href="../../minutes/2022/11-08.html">the minutes of the previous meeting</a>.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-open-actions" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="open-actions"><span class="section-number-3">1.5.</span> Review of open action items <code>[7/8]</code></h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-open-actions">
<p>
(Items marked [X] are believed to have been closed via email before
this agenda was posted.)
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-002-10: BTW to coordinate some ideas about improving diversity in the group</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> QT4CG-007-05: NW to make an issue for Martin’s proposed ammendment to map:build
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>See <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/236">issue #236</a>.</li>
</ul></li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> QT4CG-008-04: MK to submit a PR for <code>fn:parseQName()</code> to resolve PR #207
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>Mike reports the action is complete in PR #207</li>
</ul></li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> QT4CG-009-01: NW to coordinate with MK on an agenda for 8 November.</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> QT4CG-009-02: NW to work with MK to make sure PR #197 is updated correctly</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> NW to update PR #215
<ul class="org-ul">
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> QT4CG-009-03: NW to investigate the relationship between PR #215 and <code>resolve-uri</code>.</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> QT4CG-009-04: NW to review RFC 3896 wrt relative URIs</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> QT4CG-009-05: NW to fix the return type for <code>parse-uri</code>; consider using a record type.</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> QT4CG-009-06: NW to add error tests for <code>parse-uri</code>.</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> QT4CG-009-07: NW to make the query segments an array of maps.</li>
</ul></li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> QT4CG-010-01: DN to create an issue for proposing an optional else in XPath/XQuery</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> QT4CG-010-02: MK to incorporate the suggestions made by MSM on @then/@else on xsl:if
<ul class="org-ul">
<li><a href="https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-xslt-40/2022Nov/0013.html">https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-xslt-40/2022Nov/0013.html</a></li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-merging-prs" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="merging-prs"><span class="section-number-3">1.6.</span> Merging PRs that are accepted in principle</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-merging-prs">
<p>
We’ve been keeping PRs open while detailed comments are worked out. I
think that’s a fine model, but it has the consequence that we end up
with a lot of PRs open for a long time. That increases the chances
that we’ll create merge conflicts, making our life more difficult
later, and means that there are many slightly different copies of each
spec to review.
</p>

<p>
I propose that we agree to merge PRs as soon as the group feels that
the proposal is complete enough to accept in principle. We can add a
note in the history (for functions, at least) that it’s provisionally
accepted until detailed comments are resolved, or words to that
effect.
</p>

<p>
In the very short term, I would especially like to merge all of the
PRs that are open against F&amp;O so that the XML validity errors and the
new markup for “type references” can be sorted out.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>RD: That makes sense</li>
<li>JL: Where do discussions happen?</li>
<li>NW: I think we get discussion in the issues until there’s a PR, then
on the PR.</li>
<li>MSM: In groups that I have been in that use a two-pass approach, the
point of not considering things changed until the wording is all correct, one side
effect is that if there are minor side effects in the wording, 
if we merge earlier, is there a way to ensure that nits don’t fall under the table?</li>
<li>MK: I’ve usually seen that managed through actions</li>
<li>MSM: Okay.</li>
<li>NW: At least in F&amp;O, we have a history section where we can observe
that it’s unresolved.</li>
<li>MK: XMLSpec also has an ednote; we could render them.</li>
</ul>

<p>
ACTION QT4CG-011-06: NW to make sure ednotes are rendered.
</p>

<p>
Proposal: merge PRs when they’re accepted in principle.
</p>

<p>
Agreed.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-meeting-logistics" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="meeting-logistics"><span class="section-number-3">1.7.</span> Meeting logistics</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-meeting-logistics">
<p>
DN observes that he had trouble getting into the meeting. There was a
different Zoom link and passcode last week and, for some reason, Zoom
asked DN for a passcode this week.
</p>

<p>
ACTION QT4CG-011-07: NW to make sure the meeting passcode is on the logistics page
</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-technical-agenda" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="technical-agenda"><span class="section-number-2">2.</span> Technical Agenda</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-technical-agenda">
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-variadic-functions" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="pr-variadic-functions"><span class="section-number-3">2.1.</span> Review pull request #197 (was 166; variadic functions)</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-pr-variadic-functions">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>See <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-197">pull request #197</a> (you’ll find links to formatted versions of the specs at <a href="https://qt4cg.org/">https://qt4cg.org/</a>).</li>
<li>See also the nexus of issues <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/162">#162</a>, <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/161">#161</a>, <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/160">#160</a>, <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/159">#159</a>, <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/158">#158</a>, <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/157">#157</a>, and <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/155">#155</a>.</li>
<li>See the discussion from <a href="../../minutes/2022/10-11.html#pr-variadic-functions">meeting 006</a>, <a href="../../minutes/2022/10-18.html#pr-variadic-functions">meeting 007</a>, and <a href="../../minutes/2022/10-25.html#pr-variadic-functions">meeting 008</a>.</li>
</ul>

<p>
NW updated the PR with MK’s most recent changes.
</p>

<p>
We hope to resolve this PR this week.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MSM: I noticed that somewhere in the middle, some of the new text
uses the unqualified term “function” and it caught my eye partly
because early on in this pull requestion there’s a note that we use
the term “function item”. Was that change intentional, or does it
need a tweak?</li>
<li>MK: This crosses a couple of PRs. The Data Model uses the term
“function” to mean an item. I’ve for the moment stuck to that, but
I’ve also proposed changing it otherwise it gets too confused with
static functions which aren’t function items.</li>
<li>MSM: I had the impression that in a lot of cases in this PR we were
using function item.</li>
<li>MK: Yes, but it’s probably not uniformly applied.</li>
<li>MSM: I’m pretty sure that the bit that caught my eye was “apropos of
lookup” where there’s a reference that’s neither to a function
definition or a function item, just a “function”.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Subsequent discussion reveals that the editor thinks the sentence is
(too?) informal.
</p>

<p>
ACTION QT4CG-011-01: MK to fix the reference to “function” in XPath 4.4.1.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>RD: Looking through the grammar, the function signature with
defaults is a sequence of param with defaults with optional default
values. So according the grammar you can interleave optional and
non-optional parameters. But elsewhere we say that required ones
have to come first.</li>
<li>MK: I decided to make that an extra-grammatical rule.</li>
<li>RD: That makes sense, the grammar is difficult to get right.</li>
<li>NW: An action to add it to A.1.2?</li>
<li>MK: No, I don’t think that’s necessary. We have too many constraints
like this that aren’t mentioned.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Accept this PR?
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-fn-while" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="pr-fn-while"><span class="section-number-3">2.2.</span> Review pull request #210: Issue 80: fn:while</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-pr-fn-while">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>See <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-210">pull request #210</a> and the <a href="../../minutes/2022/11-01.html#pr-fn-while">minutes of two weeks ago</a>.</li>
</ul>

<p>
We hope to resolve this PR this week.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>CG: I renamed the function from <code>fn:while</code> to <code>fn:iterate-while</code> per
DN. Most use cases can be realized with this function, so I haven’t
explored the until variant.</li>
<li>MSM: The one question I have relates to a remark that MK made. If
you want to generate a sequence of items until something happens, is
there a way to do that using <code>fn:iterate-while</code>. This isn’t a reason
not to accept the proposal, I’m just curious.</li>
<li>CG: I think it’s absolutely possible, you can generate any kind of
data structure you want. You can pass the sequence along, etc.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Accept this PR?
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>DN: I think that it would be good to discuss <code>fn:iterate-until</code> now.</li>
<li>MK: Do we have a spec for <code>fn:iterate-until</code>?</li>
<li>MSM: How would it be different?</li>
<li>DN: The condition is just the opposite condition.</li>
<li>CG: We also talked about having the action performed at least once.
Then we wouldn’t need to negate the predicate.</li>
<li>MK: Point of order: there’s no proposal for this.</li>
</ul>

<p>
ACTION QT4CG-011-02: CG to work with DN to propose an “until” variant.
</p>

<p>
Proposal: Accept <b>this</b> PR?
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-subtyping" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="pr-subtyping"><span class="section-number-3">2.3.</span> Review pull request #202 (was 196; subtyping)</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-pr-subtyping">
<p>
See <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-202">pull request #202</a>
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: The principle changes are to the section on defining subtyping
rules. There were two major comments on the original proposal: lots
of good detail from RD and a question of the fundamental nature of
atomic values from MSM. I propose to address the latter in a
different issue. 
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… This primarily addresses the subtyping rules that are common
between XPath and XQuery.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>NW: The diffs are awful, they don’t deal with the notation changes.</li>
<li>MK: Where RD raised technical questions, I’ve managed to persuade
myself that it’s only more explicit.</li>
<li>RD: I’m happy with the changes. The only minor thing is that in the
generated output, the example blocks don’t have the proper styling.</li>
<li>MSM: An editorial point, hopefully not a bike-shedding issue, you
are using the notation “itemtype-subtype” with two arguments as a
more verbose way of notating the subtype relation. But my instinct
is that if you are going to name a binary relation for the types or
roles of its arguments, the order of the name should be the same as
the name of the arguments. So, change the order or change the name
to “subtype-itemtype”</li>
<li>MK: I kept the function notation basically in case people refer to it.</li>
<li>MSM: So that pseudo function with its backwards arguments, as I see
it, is a ship that has sailed.</li>
<li>MK: Yes. And it always confused me which is why I got rid of it.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Accept this PR?
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-h-743C4A9D-BAEF-4C75-A412-BDFAA9C89856" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="h-743C4A9D-BAEF-4C75-A412-BDFAA9C89856"><span class="section-number-3">2.4.</span> Review pull request #207: new expanded-QName function</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-h-743C4A9D-BAEF-4C75-A412-BDFAA9C89856">
<p>
See <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-207">pull request #207</a>
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>RD: The spec references braced URI literal, which is the “U{“ part
of the construct. What it needs to be is the “URI qualified name”
instead. That’s the “Q{}local-name”.</li>
<li>MK: Uhm…</li>
<li>RD: If you look at the expanded QName section.</li>
<li>MK: Yes, you’re right.</li>

<li>MSM: I think there’s another place where braced URI literal is
referred to that should perhaps be expanded QName. I’m looking at
F&amp;O section 10.1.2 under <code>fn:parse-QName()</code>.</li>
</ul>

<p>
ACTION QT4CG-011-03: MK to change the references to URI qualified name in both QName-related functions.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: In the last paragraph, the reference to <code>BracedURILiteral</code> is ok.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Accept the PR?
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-h-11CAAAFD-8175-4D10-83FA-BEC6AA3312A6" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="h-11CAAAFD-8175-4D10-83FA-BEC6AA3312A6"><span class="section-number-3">2.5.</span> Review pull request #215: parse-uri/build-uri</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-h-11CAAAFD-8175-4D10-83FA-BEC6AA3312A6">
<p>
See <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-215">pull request #215</a>
</p>

<p>
Waiting on actions QT4CG-009-0{3,4,5,6,7} on NW.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>RD: Make a separate subsection like RegEx pattern and point to it
from both places.</li>
</ul>

<p>
ACTION QT4CG-011-04: NW to define the parse-uri/build-uri record types in a separate section
</p>

<p>
ACTION QT4CG-011-05: NW to update the history for parse-uri/build-uri to indicate that details are still being resolved
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-h-04B58DC1-A005-4AD5-83F0-B3BCE110FB76" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="h-04B58DC1-A005-4AD5-83F0-B3BCE110FB76"><span class="section-number-3">2.6.</span> Review pull request #222: sequence comparisons</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-h-04B58DC1-A005-4AD5-83F0-B3BCE110FB76">
<p>
See <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-222">pull request #222</a>
</p>

<p>
Accepted at <a href="../../minutes/2022/11-01.html">meeting 009</a>, waiting for MK to resolve a merge conflict.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-h-37009862-494E-4CCE-9FA7-DE5B2E9F8474" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="h-37009862-494E-4CCE-9FA7-DE5B2E9F8474"><span class="section-number-3">2.7.</span> Review pull request #228: make F&amp;O spec valid XML</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-h-37009862-494E-4CCE-9FA7-DE5B2E9F8474">
<p>
See <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-228">pull request #228</a>
</p>

<p>
Approved by RD, waiting for open PRs on F&amp;O to be accepted, then NW
will resolve any merge conflicts that arise and commit it.
</p>

<p>
Proposal: Accept the PR (after resolving merge conflicts)?
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-h-A132F93F-0414-4495-A868-A7F32A6D642A" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="h-A132F93F-0414-4495-A868-A7F32A6D642A"><span class="section-number-3">2.8.</span> Review pull request #230: guarded expressions, issue #71</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-h-A132F93F-0414-4495-A868-A7F32A6D642A">
<p>
See <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-230">pull request #230</a> and related <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/71">issue #71</a>.
</p>

<p>
Approved by CG.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: The section on errors and optimization, which was always
troublesome, gives implementations an awful lot of license to
rearrange expressions in ways that introduce and eliminate errors.
There’s a very limited set of exceptions for conditional
expressions. What this does is take out that text for conditional
expressions from 2.3.4 and generalize it into the concept of guarded
expressions in 2.3.5. It gives similar guarantees for a number of
other cases: “and” and “or” expressions where it says the first is
guarded by the second; the same for multiple predicates, they behave
like “and”.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… It also says that for loops, if you pull something out of the
loop, it can’t raise an error if the loop is executed zero times.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>MSM: I’m not up to speed on this, if I’ve understood correctly, the
upshot is that implementations can still reorder things, but if the
reordered code raises an error, you have to work out if it would
have raised the error in the original order.</li>
<li>JL: Why is this in XQuery instead of XPath?</li>
<li>MK: It’s in both.</li>
<li>DN: I fully support this, but it just touches on the surface and we
need to consider the topic of short circuit operators. Many
languages have short circuiting operators. Maybe we can consider
allowing the programmer to specify hints about possible lazy evaluation.</li>
<li>MK: I’m very conscious that the whole treatment of error handling is
still extremely informal and this is a small step in the direction
of making it a bit more formal. Unfortunately, I’m not a formalist.
It would be nice to have someone who could really do the formal
semantics of error handling much more thoroughly.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… With respect to lazy evaluation, we’ve done hints before
(ordered vs unordered) and they’ve been spectacularly
unsuccessful. Implementors ignore them, users don’t understand
them, so I have doubts about hints are likely to be of widespread
benefit.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>RD: There is a formal semantics for XPath/XQuery 1.0 but that got
abandoned.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Accept this PR?
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-any-other-business" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="any-other-business"><span class="section-number-2">3.</span> Any other business</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-any-other-business">
<p>
None heard.
</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
